-IRITY STRATEGY OF LATVIA
2014—2018

CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF LATVIA
2014—2018

CONTENTS

1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2
2. Aims and Basic Principles of the Policy ............................................................................................................................... 3
3. Overview of Cyber Security in Latvia ................................................................................................................................ 4
4. Key Areas of Action ............................................................................................................................................................... 5

 

4.1. Governance and Resources of Cyber Security:

National Cyber Security ........................................................................................................................................... 5
State Owned ICT ........................................................................................................................................................ 7
Critical Infrastructure .............................................................................................................................................. 8
Human Resources ...................................................................................................................................................... 9
4.2. Rule of Law in cyber space and Reduction onyber Crime ................................................................................ 10
4.31 Crisis Management ................................................................................................................................................... 1 l
4.4. Awareness raising, Education and Research ............................................................................................................... 12
4.5. International Cooperation ........................................................................................................................................... 14

 

5. Link to Other Development Planning Documents .

 

6. Final Remarks ......................................................................................................................................................................... 17
7. Acronyms and Deﬁnitions of Terms .. . 18
Appendix No. 1 — Visualisation of National Cyber Security Policy Coordination ........................................................... 21
1. INTRODUCTION

Latvian state administration, society and economy depend
on the opportunities and services ensured by information
and communication technology (hereinaﬁer — ICT), and
ICT determines the existence of information society in
Latvia. The Sustainable Development Strategy of Latvia
deﬁnes the promotion of the further development of a
modern and innovative society, open for new ideas and
the use of high technology as an asset for the economic
development and global competitiveness of Latvia'

Due to the increasing use of ICT in society, state ad-
ministration, and the economy, its illegal use, damage,
paralysis or destruction may cause threats to state and
public security, public order and economic activity,
as well as the hindrance of the further development of
the national economy. It is possible to intentionally and
unintentionally disturb or suspend the operation of the
network of state information systems and electronic
communications, as well as to encumber the functions
of the political, economic and military decision-making
mechanisms of the state, cause material damages, mis-
information of society, and trigger technogenic failures.
Insecurity in cyber space may impact the reliability of
the use of ICT and thus prevent the development of a

' Sustainable Development Strategy of Latvia until 2030.

2

modern and innovative society. During politically, so-
cially, or economically sensitive developments, major
cyber attacks may be directed against Latvia. A secure
and reliable information society and e-government is not
possible in a state without a national competence in cy«
bet security and cryptography.

With the increasing trend of society’s range and use of
services in cyber space, the number of cyber attacks and
methods in which attacks are carried out is increasing re<
spectively.Z

To reduce and prevent the risks and threats in cyber space,
a uniﬁed and coordinated cyber security policy involving
both the public and private sector is required. The Cyber
Security Strategy of Latvia lays down strategic priorities
in developing cyber security policy and an accompanying
action plan will be introduced in the ﬁrst half of 2014. The
Strategy has been developed in line with documents of in-
ternational organisations, especially the EU and NATO as
well as according to the measures speciﬁed in the National
Security Concept and the State Defence Concept.

‘ Symanlec Internet Security Threat Report 2013 about the increase of
attacks and vulnerability in the world.
2. AIMS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE POLICY

The aim of the cyber security yolicy is a secure and reliable
cyber space, which ensures a safe, reliable, and continuous
supply of services essential for the state and society.

In implementing the cyber security policy, the following
principles are being used — development, cooperation,
responsibility, and openness.

Development - it is possible to protect against rapidly
growing threats in cyber space only by constantly and
systematically developing and improving skills in the
ICT sector and its security specialisation.

Cooperation — the effective protection against threats in
cyber space unrestricted by geographical boundaries of
countries or administrative boundaries of institutions is

only possible through cooperation at both the national
and international level.

Responsibility — it is possible to effectively reduce risks
in cyber space only if all parties involved in cyber space,
including individuals, state institutions, and private busi-
nesses are informed about and aware of the effects of their
activity or inactivity on their own security and the secu-
rity of others.

Openness — the cyber security policy is to be imple-
mented by facilitating the accessibility of information
and communication technology while respecting the
rights and fundamental freedoms of an individual,
searching for a balance between freedom, privacy, and
security, as well as promoting good practices, ethics,
and standards in cyber space.
3. OVERVIEW OF CYBER SECURITY IN LATVIA

Modern society uses ICT more extensivety by both direct—
1y acquiring information and processing it and creating
new and widely accessible tools for self-expression, Con-
venient and diverse mutual communication tools and
platforms are being used to receive services. A total of
75.8 ‘36 of the inhabitants of Latvia have used the Internet.
while 70.3 % use the Internet at least once a week'. The
number of electronic transactions in the biggest banks in
Latvia exceeds 90 96 of the total number of transactions,Z

and more than 25 % of state institution services are avail-
able electronically’.

Extensive use of ICT has changed the daily routine of
society, and a virtual environment where physical and dig-
ital actions merge has been created. The idea that ICT is a
matter of interest ofjust a small group of professionals has
been gradually substituted by the understanding that the
entire society is, to a greater or lesser extent, linked with
ICT, and the range of services provided and supported by
ICT will increase in the following yams. Since ICT is widely
used. all members of society — from ICT users to man-
agers, decision makers and legislators — should have an
understanding about the basic principles of the processes
and security of cyber space.

ICT solutions and services have a complicated structure,
but they are wider accessible. It is easy to use cyber space to

' Central Statistical Bureau Inhabitants using computer/Imernel at the
beginning ofthe year. 2012.

‘ Latvian Internet Asochuion. Study of Internet Banking in Lam 2011.
3 Ministry of Envimnmenlal Protection and Regonal Development. Ree
suhs of Assessment Ind Qualiﬁalion o(a.“ Public Services vaided by the
State Summary ofnll Department Servm Version 1.02012.

4

cause damage to an individual, a societal group, or a coun-
try as a whole. Furthermore, the use of ICI‘ tools can re—
strict the rights and fundamental freedoms of an individual

or violate the right to privacy and personal data protection.

The situation in Latvian cyber space is characterised by
a considerable number of ICT security incidents, from
several incidents of high signiﬁcance to hundreds of in-
cidents of low signiﬁcance aﬁ'ecting state and municipal
institutions, private businesses and individuals. According
to an overview by CERTLV, 4964 high priority incidents
and over 200 thousand low priority incidents have been
registered in 2013.‘ The trend of politically, socially or
economically sensitive developments being accompanied
by intentionally organised cyber attacks in is increasing.
Latvia may be subject to an increased risk during its 2015
Presidency of the Council of the EU.

In order to reduce the number of cases when with the help
of ICT damage to society is caused, it is important to de-
velop a set of comprehensive measures that would protect
cyber space and its services. The strategy sets ﬁve priority
areas of action:

1. Governance and Resources onyber Security.

2. Rlﬂeoflawincybaspaneandmducﬁmonyba’Crime.
3. Crisis management.

4. Awareness raising, education and research.

5. International cooperation.

‘ CERTLV Overview 2013.
4. KEY AREAS OF ACTION

4.1. GOVERNANCE AND RESOURCES OF CYBER
SECURITY

ICT solutions and services are developed, improved and
maintained in both the public and the private sector. For
the solutions and services to be reliable, safe and continu-
ous, it is necessary to apply information security require-
ments, standards, and good practices throughout their
entire life cycle by including risk analysis based security
planning, and assessing political, economic, social, legal,
and personal data protection aspects. Cyber security policy
implementation in Latvia involves a broad, comprehensive
range of interested parties; therefore it is necessary to create
an effective cyber security governance model.

National Cyber Security

National cyber security should be viewed in three di-
mensions k infrastructure, services, and processes #
where the provision of information safety is required.
At the moment, cyber security governance is organised
in a partially centralised model, where the leading insti-
tutions (according to the respective authority) perform
the function of handling the strategy, methodology and
coordination of cyber security, whereas supervisors of
speciﬁc ICT solutions and services constantly ensure
practical implementation and execution of the estab—
lished requirements. National cyber security is based on
mutual cooperation, where each state authority performs
its functions, including in cyber space, and cooperates
with other involved parties directly or through the Na-
tional Information Technology Security Council (here-
inafter — Council). The Council has been established
by the Law on the Security of Information Technolo-
gy, which determines the development of cyber security

policy at a national level. According to the Law the
Council coordinates the development of cyber security
policy and planning and implementation of objectives
and measures. The Council is the central national au-
thority for the exchange of information and cooperation
between the public and private sector, and its operation
is ensured by the National Cyber Security Policy Coordi-
nation Section of the Ministry of Defence.

National cyber security policy is developed by

(Visualisation in Appendix No. l):

1. Ministry of Defence (MOD) — coordinates develop-
ment and implementation of infnnnation technology
security and protection policy, as well as cooperates
in the provision of international cooperation. The Na-
tional Cyber Security Policy Coordination Section of
the MOD organises and provides support for the im-
plementation ofcyber security policy.

2. MinistryofForeignAﬁairHMFA) — coordinatesintet-
national coopeiaﬁm and Iatvia’s participation in vari-
ousiutemaﬁonaliniﬁaﬁvarelntcdmthecybasecurity.

3. FinancialandCapttalMarket Commission(FCMC) —
regulates and supervises activities in cyber space of
members of the ﬁnancial and capital market cyber
space; the Bank of Latvia (BoL) promotes secure and
smooth operation of payment systems, while credit
institutions are responsible for secure availability of
electronic services in their sector.

4. Ministry of Economics (MOE) - develops economic
policy and promotes the development of competitive-
ness and innovation.

5. Ministry of the Interior (M01), State Police (SP) and
Security Polite (Se?) — implement the policies for com-
bating crime, public order, security protection, and ﬁle
protection of rights and legal interests of individuals, as
well as coordinates the settlement of crisis situations.

6. Information Technology Security Incident Re-
sponse Institution CERTLV - monitors and analy—
ses developments in cyber space, reacts to incidents
and coordinates their prevention. carries out re—
search, organises educational events and training. as
well as supervises the implementation of obligations
speciﬁed in the Law on the Security of Information
Technology. CER‘IZLV provides support for Latvian
and foreign state and municipal institutions, entre-
preneurs, and individuals.

7. Ministry of Education and Science (MoES) — pro-
motes knowledge and understanding of cyber space
and its secure use.

8. Ministry of Welfare (MOW) — implements the so-
cial policy and the policy for the protection of chil-
dren’s rights.

9. Operation of the Safer Internet Centre of Latvia Net-
Safz Latvia is ensured by the Latvian Internet Associ—
ation, educates society about possible risks and threats
online, and promotes the use of secure internet content.

10. National Armed Forces (NAP) and Cyber Defence
Unit (CDU) — provide support in crisis situations.

11. Nongovernmental organisations in the IT sector -
provide support, consult and cooperate with the
Council in developing and implementing the cyber
security policy'.

12. Ministry of Transport (MoT) — organises the imple-
mentation of communication policy.

' Existing partners of the Council: association “ISACA Latvia Chap-
ter", Latvian Open Technology Association, Latvian Information and

Communication Technology Association. Latvian lntemet Association.
Asociation of Commercial Banks of Latvia, Latvian Chamber of Com-

merce and Industry.

13. Constitution Protection Bureau (CPB) — oversees
the critical infrastructure.

14. Ministry of Justice (M01) and Data State Inspec-
torate (DSI) — develop, organise and coordinate the
policy on rights in the ﬁeld of personal data pro-
tection, freedom of information and supervision of
electronic documents.

15. State )olnt Stock Company “Latvian State Radio
and Television Centre” (LSRTC) — the only provider
of reliable certiﬁcation services, which ensures the
infrastructure of electronic identity cards and elec-
tronic signatures.

16. Ministry of Environmental Protection and Region-
al Development (MEPRD) — organises the gover-
nance of state ICT and coordinates the electrisation
of public services, whereas State Regional Devel-
opment Agency (SRDA) ensures the operation and
development of solutions for shared use of state ICT.

The Law on the Security of Information Technology and
related Cabinet regulations determine basic security
requirements for state and municipal institutions and
providers of public electronic communications services,
as well as supervisors of the critical infrastructure of ICT.
In cases of incidents, a set of deﬁ nite procedures for state
and municipal institutions and owners and legal managers
of the critical infrastructure are established.

In the private sector, the governance of information securi~
ty is based on the sustainability of business and secure and
reliable provision ofservices. In some sectors, there are laws
and regulations which, for example, apply to credit institu—
tions, providers of electronic services, or personal data pro-
tection; but good practices and standards for the security of
ICT solutions are not widely used. The market of electronic
communication operators is scattered, and a part of service
providers do not fulﬁl the requirements speciﬁed in the leg-
islation, thus causing security risks to both clients and other
users of ICT infrastructure in Latvia and abroad.

According to the Law on the Security of Information
Technology, a national Information Technology Security
Incident Response Institution CER'ELV has been created.
CERTLV maintains common monitoring of cyber space,
provides support for Latvian and foreign state and mu-
nicipal institutions, entrepreneurs and individuals in
preventing IT security incidents as well as coordinates
the prevention of security incidents. As activity in cyber
space increases, CERTLV together with institutions from
the public and private sectors must develup resources
which would allow the summarization of technical infor-
mation about incidents in cyber space and storage of this
information for analysis and evaluation.

Required actions:

1. Improve coordinated development, implementation
and evaluation of the national cyber security policy
within the framework of the National IT Security
Council through cooperation of representatives of pub-
lic, non-governmental and private sectors. Strengthen
the leading position of the Ministry of Defence in a
coordinated development and implementation of the
cyber security policy.

2. Create an information exchange medium (platform)
by promoting the exchange of information among en<
trepreneurs about topical cyber security threats, prob-
lems, solutions, good practices, and their application.

3. Implement the assessment of risks to national cyber
security.

4. Promote the standards and practices of good security
management in the public and private sector by creat—
ing understanding about ICT security in the business

environment and organising regular training for lead-
ing employers.

5. Improve the mechanism of implementation and
monitoring of security requirements for electronic
communication operators.

6. Improve the ability of CERT.LV to observe, analyse
and prevent IT security incidents and cooperate with
NATO and EU partners on information exchange.

7. Develop CERT.LV resources and competences to per-
form centralised security tests.

State owned ICT

Cyber security at a national level is closely connected to
the state ICT governance system, which is now partially
regulated by the Law on State Information Systems. Its fur-
ther development has been outlined in the concept of the
organisational model of state ICT management The con-
cept sets many tasks for the optimisation of state ICT and
the improvement of management processes of state ICI‘.
Fulﬁlment of necessary tasks would allow reaching a ho«
mogenous, more shared and professionally and rationally
maintained state ICT infrastructure, which would attract
better motivated human resources with a higher degree of
specialisation and higher professional competences, thus
increasing the overall level of state ICT security. The op-
timisation of state ICT would. inter aha, allow focusing of
resources for the improvement of the technological security
of state ICT solutions, for example, by creating shared solu—
tions for the continuity of operations, etc. Mth respect to
the management of state ICT. the concept provides for the
development and implementation of standards and guide-
lines for the continuity, reliability and security of electronic
state administrative processes.

Currently used state ICT solutions and especially state infor-
mation systems (SIS) contain information, illegal exposure
or acquisition, distortion or deletion of which can cause
signiﬁcant damage to a speciﬁc person, society, or state.
Denying access to SIS or interrupting the operation of sup-
port systems can completely or partially paralyse the work
of the public administration. Therefore it is important that
the development, introduction and operation of state ICT
solutions, including security management, is carried out in
a rational, effective, transparent and mutually harmonised
manner by using best practices of the sector and guidelines
to minimise to the occurrence of ICT security threats due
to mistakes as well as deliberate actions.

The Law on State Information Systems provides for a single
level of technical and organisational requirements for all
registered systems irrespective of their functionality, value
of the collected information, and inﬂuence on the execu-
tion of functions of the public administration, both within
the institution and outside of it. The lack of differentiation
of requirements causes inadequate pressure on systems of
varying signiﬁmnce and capacity, as well as the willingness
to avoid system registration. Differentiation of the require-
ments and categorisation of the systems would allow the
application of more precise and ~ appropriate legal mea»
sures in case of a criminal oﬁence.

The case study by MOEPRD suggests that one half of the
holders of state information systems do not ensure mea-
sures for security management, as they axe not motivated
or competent. The state ICT security monitoring and
control system is insufﬁcient.

Required actions:

1. Continue the implementation of improved manage-
ment measures speciﬁed in the conceptual organisa-
tional model ofstate ICT management, which provides
for the development of a uniﬁed ICT architecture and

development or improvement of management process-
es, standards and guidelines.

2. Develop a legal order for a uniﬁed management of the
provision of state ICT that provides for a categorisa—
tion of systems based on a risk analysis and appropri<
ately differentiated requirement framework for secu-
rity management.

3. Improve the understanding and knowledge of the
holders of ICT solutions and infrastructure by organ-
ising training programmes for the managing staﬂ of
the state administration and the staff invoked in ICT
security management.

4. Evaluate the efﬁciency of the supervision of ICT secu<
rity management, the responsibility and penalties for
not implementing the security management measures,
as well as to establish minimum requirements for the
work of security managers.

5. Organise extraordinary audits and security tests of
state ICT solutions and infrastructure performed by
independent organisations.

6. Develop the procedure according to which the institu<
tions report to a common competent authority about
the implementation of information security measures.

7. Improve the cooperation between the Latvian Associ-
ation of Local and Regional Governments, Municipal-
ities and Institutions in order to improve the security
management of municipal ICT resources.

Critical Infrastructure

Critical infrastructure of information technology has been
established for the performance of basic functions essen—
tial for state and society to ensure the integrity, accessibi—
lity and conﬁdentiality of the critical infrastructure. Once
a year the Cabinet of Ministers establishes and reviews the
information technology mfrastructure whose termination
can substantially threaten the existence of the state.I The
critical infrastructure of information technology has been
included in the critical infrastructure of the state. and its
owners and legal managers, in cooperation with security
institutions and CERTLV, consistently improve security
measures. Planning and implementation of security mea-
sures for critical infrastructure is regulated by the Cabinet
of Ministers.‘ For the purposes of exchange of knowledge
and experience, as well as for the improvement of proce-
dures, representatives of critical infrastructures are regular-
ly involved in training organised by CERTZLV.

Required actions:

1. Improve the processing of information and experi-
ence exchange about incidents, protection of the crit-
ical infrastructure and prevention of risks among the
holders of critical infrastructures, CERTLV and state
security institutions.

2. Organise crisis training and security breach tests at a
national, regional and international level and in coop-
eration with the Cyber Defence Unit of the National
Armed Forces (NAP).

3. Strengthen the security of state ICT resources by
developing technical tools for the automatic provi-
sion and control of security, as well as to improve the
capacity, knowledge and mutual cooperation of the
security staff,

' Cabinet Regulation No. 496 of l April 2010 “Pinning and Implemen-
tation Procedure of Identiﬁcation and Security Measum for the Critical
Infrastructure, including the Critical Infrastructure ofEumpe'

1 Cabinet Regulation No. 100 of 1 February 2011 “Planning and Im-
plementation Procedure of the Security Measures for the Critical
Infrastructure of Information Technology”

Human Resources

The situation in state and municipal institutions is char-
acterised by signiﬁcant differences in human and mate-
rial resources, from institutions with well—paid and high-
1y qualiﬁed employees and modem technical resources
to — in most cases —institutions with employees with
inadequate qualiﬁcation and low quality information
technology. This creates an unequal level of fulﬁlment
of obligations laid down by the legislation in the area of
information security management in the state adminis-
tration. Fuxthermore, the restricted availability of highly
qualiﬁed experts in the labour market does not meet the
demand of the private sector and companies are using
outsourcing services to carry out their functions.

The number of ICT security management experts and se-
curity technology experts in the Latvian labour market is
small. The professional standard for ICT security manag-
ers and a certiﬁcation procedure for this speciality have
not been established, and study programmes in comput—
ing, computer science and information technology do not
purposefully train experts for this specialisation. There
are minimum competency requirements established for
the ICT security managers in state administration in-
stitutions. IT specialists from state and municipal insti-
tutions participate in “Be secure” training seminars and
annual brieﬁngs in the institutions; however, the acquired
amount of knowledge is restricted and its use in practical
situations is not being practised and tested.

Required actions:

1. Assess and raise existing professional standards related
to the ICT by including the requirements for the knowl-
edge about and skills for cyber security.

2. Deﬁne, increase and assess the professional competen-
cies of experts responsible for cyber security and promote

9
the use of expert certiﬁcations acquired abroad for the directions — preventive work for the reduction of criminal
conﬁrmation of such competencies. oﬂ'ences and eﬂ‘ective combating of crime.
3. Promote the contribution of higher education institu-
tions by including cyber security specialisation in study The complicated structune and operation of cyber space out.
programmes. line two problematic areas in the implementation ofeﬁecu've
4. Perform a labour market analysis about the demand, combating 0f cybercrime. Firstly, the understanding of the
supply, remuneration of cyber security experts and the concept “signiﬁcant damage” and its application is an im«
employment level of experts prepared by educational portant precondition for establishing constituent elements of
institutions. a criminal offence and appropriate qualiﬁcation and punish-
5. Improve the competencies of the teaching staff in the ment ofa criminal oﬁmceSecondty, investigation and collec-
area of cyber security and to support the prepaIation of tion of evidence in cyber space requires spedﬁc knowledge.
methodological materials.
Implementation of preventive actions requires organised
ICT and a legislative base regulating its security, as well as
4.2. RULE OF LAW IN CYBER SPACE AND REDUCI'ION eﬂ'ective use thereof. The existing capacity in combating
OF CYBER CRIME cybercrime should be developed by strengthening elec-
tronic evidence. Investigation, as well as collection and
Rule of Law in cyber space is based on the principle of assessment of evidence requires special knowledge and
equivalency, which provides for the observation of laws 3 suﬁcient level of competence is crucial in law enforce-
and regulations both in the physical and the virtual en~ ment agencies, prosecutor’s ofﬁces and courts to ensure
vironment. The state is obliged to ensure the basic rights the rule of law in cyber space.
and freedoms of any person laid down by the Constitu-
tion and the observation of principles of universal rights Required actions:
irrespective of their ﬁeld of application. The provided 1. Assess the laws and regulations in the ICT sector as

technological opportunities have favoured the increase a foundation for applying the Latvian Administrative
of criminal offences in cyber space. To commit such of- Violations Code and Criminal Law and to improve this
fences, criminals use automatic data processing systems foundation to ensure effective protection of individu—
as a tool for committing crimes that direct them towards als’ interests through and in relation to criminal law.
another protected or publicly inaccessible automatic 2. Assess the present situation and the necessary amend<
data processing system or its resources. An automatic ments in legislation that provide for punishment for
data processing system can also be used as a medium causing damage to the security or operation of infor—
for the circulation of illegal or offensive and defamatory mation systems directed towards automatic data pro-
(incitement to racial hatred, distribution of child por— cessing systems.
nography, etc.) information. 3. Develop the terminology related to the information
security and cyber security in the Latvian language and
The reduction of cybercrime requires action in two basic harmonise its use in the legislative enactments.
10
4. Assess and improve the supervision of obligations in
the area of cyber security laid down by the legislative
enactments and to promote support for the fulﬁl-
ment thereof.

5. Facilitate discussions and exchange of opinions about
the identiﬁcation of new ICT crimes and improvement
of the legal basis for the restriction thereof in line with
the international trends.

6. Combat and investigate cybercrimes by assessing and
improving the existing resources, procedures, coopera-
tion mechanisms, and their efﬁciency.

7. Assess and develop the existing capacity of acquiring
and analysing evidence in the process of investigation
of cybercrimes by developing the competence of SP
and improving the cooperation with CERTZLV.

8. Develop methodical materials for studies about the ICT
sector for the purposes of increasing the knowledge of
police oﬂﬁcers. persons directing the proceedings and
judges about the ICT sector and to implement an in-
depth training programme about the issues of combat-
ing cybercrime.

9. Develop a uniﬁed mechanism for listing the criminal
offences in cyber space (statistics) in the system of
police, prosecution and court.

4.3. PREPAREDNESS AND CAPACITY TO Acr IN CRISIS
SITUATIONS

Institutions which ensure national cyber security capabili-
ties have been set up in Latvia. Plans for action in the case
of increased threat have been developed and are being regu<
[arty updated. Cooperation with the Ministry of the Interior
for solving different crisis situations has been established.
The involvement of experts is available in collaboration
with the private sector. However, the present resources and

measures are not suﬂicient and organised enough to ensure
efﬁcient and prompt action in the use of serious and exten-
sive [CT security incidents or cyber attacks.

The present situation in Latvia and threats in cyber space,
as well as resources for the prevention of risks and man-
agement of a crisis that are at the disposal of the state have
been assessed in the cyber crisis exercise by the Cabinet
of Ministers 0n 7 December 2012. Reduction of incidents
and the prevention of a crisis require individual under-
standing about cyber security and the responsibility of
each organisation, where CERTLV can give advice on
daily work or provide support in cases of serious and
unexpected incidents.

Considering the limited resources of the state administra-
tion and the conclusions of the cyber crisis exercise, the
NAF are developing a Cyber Defence Unit to provide sup
port for CER'ELV and NAF units in preventing ICT secu-
rity incidents and management of consequences in crisis
situations in cyber space or in war time. The Unit would be
used should CERTLV resources be insufﬁcient and involve-
ment of the Unit would faster expedite the implementation
of emergency measures or if the Unit had at its disposal
special resources for perforating such activities.' The Unit
is being created as a hack-up team of experts consisting
of volunteers from the public and private sector accord-
ing to the legal basis of the service of the National Guard.

To ensure the functioning and strengthening of the infra-
structure of electronic communication the existing infra-
structural capabilities should be developed (especially with
respect to resistance to the inﬂuence of external conditions),

' Concept of the National Armed Fares Cyber Defence Unit of the Mi-
nistry of Defence, Riga 2013.

11
as well as a new infrastructure for securing the basic func-
tions of a state, especially when the daily use of electronic
communication networks can be restricted.

Required actions:

1. Evaluate the deﬁnition of a crisis, its procedures, leg»
islation and the use thereof in the case of a possible
cyber crisis.

2. Develop the capabilities of the NAP and the Cyber
Defence Unit to react in a crisis situation and in man-
aging the consequences of major incidents by providing
and ensuring operational capability of the Unit.

3. Develop information technology and communication
systems for the NAF to ensure the support of NAP
management capabilities in crisis situations.

4. Organise regular theoretical and practical training at a
national level with the involvement of high ofﬁcials and
merchants in order to develop mutual understanding
and coordinate the management of crisis situations.

5. Improve the competence and resources of state insti-
tutions when preparing and ensuring the presidency
of the Council of the European Union in 2015 when
global cyber attacks may be directed against Latvia

6. Develop regional and international cooperation, to
ensure regular training for providing and receiving
support in a crisis situation

7. Establish an electronic communication network for
emergency situations.

8. Develop a technological and organisational solution
that provides state institutions with infrastructure and
ensures high conﬁdentiality and integrity of and acces-
sibility to state information systems.

9. Strengthen the outer scope of the national external
communication network: establish, categorise, coordi-
nate, evaluate risks, and make necessary improvements
to ensure a reliable and secure ﬂow of data between

12

Latvia and other countries, but, when necessary, to use
the network for changes in data ﬂows or the restriction
thereof between countries.

4.4. AWARENESSRAISING,EDUCATIONANDRESEARCH

An informed society is a crucial part of a secure and re
liable cyber space. Awareness is ensured by purposeful
and regular explanatory work, including the policy and
communication implemented by the leading ofﬁcials of a
country, raising the issues in educational institutions and
organising regular discussions of experts in the media.

The level of awareness of a society about the threats to
ICT, tools available for their prevention, personal rights in
the electronic medium and their infringement, as well as
about action in the case of a threat is low. According to the
statistics of CERT.LV, in almost all cases when the devices
of users have been infected and have become a part of bot-
nets (approximately 15—20 thousand a month), the users
have not deliberately caused damage and the cause of the
infection is software that has not been updated or the lack
of antivirus solutions when malicious e-mail attachments
are opened. Along with raising awareness of society, it is
important to increase understanding about ethical norms
and moral responsibilities in the electronic environment.

To improve the knowledge of ICT users, it is necessary to
implement a set of complex measures, starting from primary
and secondary education. It is necessary to organise reg‘
ular information campaigns in cooperation with non—gov—
emmental and private institutions, as well as constantly
reﬂect the information in mass media. At the moment,
cyber security issues are only tested in a uniform model in
general education in an informatics examination (knowl-
edge test part) at the secondary education leveL Although
the average level of answered questions is comparatively
high (2013 — 0.79%), it is impossible to assess the actual
actions of students in daily life. The type of communica—
tion (channel), content and methodology is to be applied
according to the chosen target audience (see Figure 1).

To develop new study programmes and educate experts and
professionals from other sectors (e.g., experts in law) about
ICT issues, a teaching stat? with an appropriate competen-
cy is required Competency should be increased by creating
and supporting security mch groups at universities and
scientiﬁc institutes. These would, ﬁrstly, attract Latvian spe-

Figure 1. The level afcyber space security knowledge according to the target audience.

Develop, motivate

Resend: l Innovation / Opinion leaders

' vironm
\
./ '\
/ Higher / ‘ ‘
Professioﬂgl \ ‘\ Create specialisation Expertise
education
Students] Ed t General
Educational institutions um 2 knowledge I.
/ /
Basic /

Society I All users 1,, form skills

At the moment, there are no academic study pro-
grammes and scientiﬁc activity in the area of cyber
security and people studying the respective subjects
abroad are not motivated to return to Latvia due to low
salaries, lack of opportunities for professional devel-
opment. According to a study by the World Economic
Forum, Latvia ranks 110th with regard to the availabil-
ity of scientists and engineers.1

‘ World Economic Forum “The Global Competitiveness Report
2012-2013”, p. 227.

cialists who are currently working abroad, serve as a basis
for the creation ofa national Cyber security (including cryp-
tography) school, provide the oppormnity in the future to
successfully participate in scientiﬁc EU projects and, ﬁnal-
ly. to create commercial products with a high added value.

Required actions:

1. Increase the competency of educational institutions
and teaching staff and their contribution to educating
children and youth about the issues of ICT security by
integrating these issues into the educational system and

13
14

organising learning activities that create understanding
about information security, privacy protection and
the use of reliable e-services. Additionally, opportuni-
ties must be ensured for children and youths to report
violations on the Internet and to receive support from
a psychologist. Further education of the teaching staﬂt
about the issues of cyber security must be organized.

. Develop educational and informative materials about

cyber security for use in educational institutions and
interest groups that are easily accessible and diﬁerenti-
ated according to various age groups.

. Develop academic studies and research in cyber se-

curity to train experts, promote innovation, establish
public-private partnerships for the support of science
and research, and to attract European funds, grants and
ﬁnancial instruments.

. Create an ICT security laboratory and to organise sci»

entiﬁc conferences about topical issues concerning
cyber security and cybercrime in cooperation with
universities and scientiﬁc institutes.

. Implement educational and informative campaigns

and other measures for the overall enhancement of the
understanding of society about the cyber security, cy-
bercrime and important threats, to expand the accessi-
bility of various ICT security software

. Develop the exchange of information and opinions

among public administration, associations of the sec-
tor, experts, business leaders, as well as creators of
public opinion — non-govemmental organisations
and the academic environment.

. Participate in international informative initiatives and

platforms, use the European Cyber Security Month and
the e-Skills Week to raise issues about the cyber security.

. Promote innovation in the cyber security sector and

develop a uniﬁed academic resource of high»capacity
computing (supercomputer).

4.5. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

The opportunities and security threats provided by cyber
space do not recognize national borders and therefore no
state can eﬂectively face new security challenges on its own.

Due to the awareness of the increasing role of cyber space
in every society, cyber security as an important issue has
been included on the agenda of cross border cooperation
and by international organisations. In bilateral and multi-
lateral Cooperation, 3 wide range of issues are usually con-
sidered i from observation of human rights in the virtual
environment to combating of crime, often also involving
the private sector. Under these conditions, different na-
tional interests inevitably collide, and thus far the inter-
national community has not reached signiﬁcant progress
in creating a common understanding and approach. At
the same time, many nomharmonised processes still take
place. It is important for Latvia to have knowledge of the
work of international and regional organisations and to
participate in this work while at the same time expressing
support for ensuring the basic principles of a democratic
society in the virtual environment. It should be not only
be safe, but also free and accessible.

Latvia is taking part in international processes, including
the work of NATO, the EU, OSCE and UN, to promote
the improvement of a secure, free and accessible cyber
space. Latvia supports the ﬁrst comprehensive resolution
of the United Nations Human Rights Council on human
rights in the virtual space and will continue to partici-
pate and strengthen such initiatives as the Freedom
Online Coalition, which focuses on observing human
rights and basic freedoms in cyber space, especially the
freedom of speech.
Latvia has joined the Council of Europe Convention on
Cyber Crime and its Additional Protocol concerning the
criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature
committed through computer systems. According to the
Convention, all involved countries harmonise their legal
regulations to cooperate in the investigation of crimes
and to ensure that the people responsible for committing
cybercrimes are held liable.

Cyber security is an important part of national defence,
and nationally developed defence capabilities can be
strengthened by cooperating with NATO and EU memv
ber states in a crisis situation. To receive effective support
when necessary and to strengthen cyber security mea-
sures in the Euro-Atlantic space, the development of both
collective and individual cyber protection capabilities of
each member state should be facilitated in accordance
with the approved NATO and EU cyber security planning
documents. NATO has approved the Cyber Defence Con-
cept and Action Plan and corresponding planning docu-
ments, which provide for the necessity to promote the de-
velopment of cyber security capabilities of both NATO as
a whole and each individual member state.

Required actions:
1. Strengthen cooperation with countries from the Bal-
tic and Northern European countries and improve the

cooperation with NATO, the EU, OSCE and UN to
improve the security, accessibility and freedom of ICT.

. Support international efforts in enhancing mutual trust

and cooperation, emphasising the equal applicability of
international legal norms to both the physical and the
virtual environment.

. Create a common Baltic university study programme

to combine regional educational resources to preparing
strong and qualiﬁed experts.

. Organise international cyber security events in Latvia

on a regular basis, highlighting Latvia as a country that
takes care of the security of ICT at a national and inter-
national level.

. Develop and test national procedures to receive prompt

and effective help in case of a cyber threat according
to the Memorandum of Understanding between Latvia
and NATO and pursuant to the NATO Cyber Defence
Concept and Action Plan.

. Strengthen cyber protection capabilities by participat-

ing in various international training courses, exercises
and cyber attack simulations within NATO, the EU,
and other international organizations and forums.
giving local experts and the Cyber Defence Unit the
opportunity to improve their knowledge about the
latest solutions in information systems security.

15
gm

5. LINK TO OTHER DEVELOPMENT PLANNING DOCUMENTS

National documents:

National Security Concept

State Defence Concept

Law on the Security of Information Technology

Law on State Information Systems (authored by MoEPRD)
Sustainable Development Strategy of Latvia until 2030
Guidelines for the Development of Information Soci»
cry in 2014—2020

Concept of the Organisational Model of the State Infor-
mation and Communication Technology Management.
Guidelines for the Electronic Communication Policy
in 201 1—20 16

Authentication Law (authored by MoEPRD)

Concept of the National Armed Forces Cyber Defence
Unit of the Ministry of Defence, 2013.

16

International documents:

I UN Human Rights Council resolution: The promotion,

protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet

NATO Strategic Concept

NATO Concept on Cy'ber Defence

NATO Cyber Defence Policy Action Plan

EU Cyber Security Strategy

Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest Convention)

Europe 2020 A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and

Inclusive Growth

- Digital Agenda of the EU

I Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council
on attacks against information systems
6. CONCLUSIONS

An ex-ante evaluation of the proposed solution has not
been carried out, since cyber security is constantly and
rapidly developing, but the ﬁelds of action established in
the guidelines are a continuation of priorities speciﬁed in
the National Security Concept and actions initiated so far.
The evaluation of the cyber security provided for in the
guidelines will create a basis for assessing and improving
further policy and the action plan.

Based on the guidelines, an action plan will be devel-
oped, which will include detailed results of the actions
and calculations on the inﬂuence on state and municipal

budgets in 2014 and in the following years. Every two
years, the Ministry of Defence performs an evaluation
of the guidelines and implementation of the action plan
within the Council and submits an informative report
and, if necessary, proposals for raising the issues of the
guidelines to the Cabinet of Ministers.

There are no policy planning documents that are be
deemed as having lost their validity. At the same time,
implementation of priorities laid down by the National
Security Concept shall continue.

17
7. ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS

ACRONYMS

BoL Bank of Latvia

CCDCOE NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence in Tallinn
CDU Cyber Defence Unit of the National Armed Forces

CERT.LV Information Technology Security Incident Response Institution
CPB Constitution Protection Bureau

DISS Defence Intelligence and Security Service

DSI Data State Inspectorate

ENISA European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
EU European Union

FCMC Financial and Capital Market Commission

ICT Information and communication technology

IT Information technology

LSRTC Latvian State Radio and Television Centre

MoE Ministry of Economics

MoEPRD Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development
MoES Ministry of Education and Science

MoFA Ministry of Foreign Affairs

MoI Ministry of the Interior

Mo] Ministry of Justice

MOT Ministry of Transport

MOW Ministry of Welfare

NAF National Armed Forces

NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NetSafe Safer Internet Centre of Latvia Net-Safe Latvia

OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe

SeP Security Police

SIS State information systems

SP State Police

SRDA State Regional Development Agency

UN United Nations

1 8
TERMS

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION OPERATOR

A merchant or afﬁliation of a foreign merchant who has
the right to perform commercial activities, provide a
public electronic communication network or electronic
communication services pursuant to the procedure laid
down by the Law on Electronic Communications.

ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION NETWORK

Transmission systems, commutation and routing devices
(including elements of the network that are not used) and
other resources that allow to transmit signals in the network
with the help of cables. radio waves, optical or other electro-
magnetic mans irrespective of the infomation transmitted.

E—GOVERNMENT

Eﬂecﬁve management of the state and municipal admin
istration with the use of information and communication
technology.

INFORMATION SOCIETY

A society whose members are able and have the upperm-
nity to acquire information with the help of information
and communication technology, link it with the existing
knowledge and use the newly acquired knowledge for
increasing their welfare.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Technology that uses electronic processing of data, in-
cluding creation, deletion, saving, reﬂection and transmit-
ting, for the purposes of performing the required tasks.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECURITY INCIDENT
A harmful event or offence, as a result of which the

 

integrity, availability or conﬁdentiality of information
technology is endangered.

INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY

A set of knowledge, methods and technical equipment that
ensures acquisition, storage and distribution of any informa-
tion with the help of computers and communimtion tools.

CYBER SECURITY

Cyber security is the collection of tools, policies, security
concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk manage-
ment approaches, actions, training, best practices, as-
surance and technologies that can be used to protect the
cyber environment and organization and user’s assets. Or-
ganisation and user’s assets include connected computing
devices, personnel, infrastructure, applications, services,
telecommunications systems, and the totality of transmit-
ted and/ or stored information in the cy'ber environment.‘

CYBER SPACE

Cyber space is an interactive environment that includes
users, networks, computing technology, soﬁware, pro~
cesses, information in transit or storage, applications,

 

' Deﬁnition by the International Telecommunication Union in the En—
glish language: 'Cybn security is the collection oftoals, policiu, security
concepts. security safeguards, guidelines, risk management approaches,
actiuns. (mining, best practices. assurance and technolagies that can be
used In protert the cyber environment and argunizah‘an and user’s us-
szts. Organisation and user's assets include connected computing nd~
25, personnel. inﬁutrucmre. applications. services, telecommunications
systems. and the tutulity of transmitted and/or stored infamaliou in the
tyber environment.” ITU-T X1205.

19
services, and systems that can be connected directly or
indirectly to the Internet, telecommunications and com-
puter networks. Cyber space has no physical boarders.‘

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

Critical infrastructure is the objects, systems, or their
parts in Latvia, which are important in providing the
performance of functions essential to society, as well
as for ensuring the protection of human health, secu-
rity, economic or social welfare, whose destruction or
malfunctioning may signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the perfor

 

' Deﬁnition of the "cyber space" from the International TelecommuA
nication Union National Cyber Security Strategy Guide in the English
language. “We use the term cybersyau tn dmribe systems and services
connected either directly to at indfrcctly to the Internet, Ielecnmmum’cm
lions and wmputer network” ind the description of cyber space in the
ITU recommendation "I’Ihisl indudcs users, networks, devices, all saﬂ-
ware. pmmcs. infomminn in 530mg: or tmnsit. applications. services.
and systems that am be connected directly or indirectly [0 network?
ITU~T X1205. Avnilahle at: http:llej.uleverviewOK3ybersecurity

20

 

mance of state functions. The critical infrastructure of

information technology is protected in order to ensure
the performance of basic functions essential to the state
and society.

STATE INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION

T E C H N 0 LOGY

According to the scope and objective of the Concept of
the Organisational Model of the State Information and
Communication Management, state information and
communication technology in this document refers to in-
formation and communication technology solutions and
services used, introduced, maintained. and operated by
direct administration institutions and institutions under
direct subordination 0r supervision thereof.

Mth respect to municipalities and legal entities or natural
persons of private law delegated to perform the duties of the
state, the concept of state information and communication
technology is applicable to the information and communi-
cation technology solutions and services that are used in
order to perform such delegated duties of the state.
Functions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

           

 

s g
a E-services StatelCT State 3 1; Electronic Private
2‘ infrastmcture information '5 E communication businesses
a} systems E providers

\ STATE SECTOR PRIVATE SECTOR

 

 

Soddy/usax
—



