REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS

NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY
2014 - 2019

0’

FOEA REéMENT ANDéECURE MAURITIUS

~ «c:- J a

The time has come for the protection mindset to be broadened — to embrace the broader concept of
resilience The aim is to build a more resilient nation — one where all Mauritians are better able to

adapt to change, where we can reduce exposure to risks, and where we are all better able to bounce
back from disaster.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Part 1
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 5
2. Vision, Mission And Goals For Cyber Security ..................................................................... 6
Part 2
3. Cyber Security Management And The Mauritian Approach ............................................... 8
Part 3
4. Strategic Guidelines For Cyber Security .............................................................................. 14
5. Importance Of The National Cyber Security Strategy And Action Plan .......................... 15
Part 4
6. National Cyber Security Strategic Action Plan .................................................................. 188

ZIPage
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

List of Abbreviations

AML — Airports of Mauritius Limited

BOM 7 Bank ofMauritius

CEB 7 Central Electricity Board

CERT-MU — Computer Emergency Response Team of Mauritius
CIB 7 Central Informatics Bureau

CISD 7 Central Information Systems Division

CWA — Central Water Authority

DPO 7 Data Protection Ofﬁce

FSC 7 Financial Services Commission

GOC — Government Online Centre

IBA 7 Independent Broadcasting Authority

ICTA — Information and Communications Technologies Authority
ISP — Internet Service Providers

ITSU 7 IT Security Unit

MBA — Mauritius Bankers Association

MCCI — Mauritius Chambers of Commerce and Industry

MICCP — Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection
MICT — Ministry of Information & Communication Technology
MIH — Mauritius Institute of Health

MITIA 7 Mauritius IT Industry Association

MOBEC - Ministry of Business, Enterpﬁse, and Cooperatives
MOE/HR — Ministry of Education and Human Resources
MOFARIIT 7 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade
MOFED — Ministry Of Finance and Economic Development
MOGECFW - Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare
MPA 7 Mauritius Ports Authority

MRA — Mauritius Revenue Authority

MSA— Mauritius Sugar Authority

MSB 7 Mauritius Standards Bureau

MTPA — Mauritius Tourism Promotion Authority

NCB — National Computer Board

NGO 7 Non—Governmenta] Organisations

OTAM — Outsourcing & Telecommunications Association of Mauritius
PMO — Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce

SIL 7 State Informatics Limited

SLO — State Law Office

SMEDA — Small and Medium Entelprises Development Authority
TEC 7 Tertiary Education Commission

3|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

PART 1

Introduction

Vision, Mission And Goals For Cyber Security

 

4|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

1. INTRODUCTION

Societies are becoming increasingly more dependent on information and communication
technologies which are globally interconnected. With these growing dependencies, information
systems and networks are extremely vulnerable to disturbances which can affect their
functioning. Cyber-security threats have become more sophisticated and have more serious
repercussions than before. There is a growing misuse of electronic networks for criminal
purposes or for objectives that can adversely affect the integrity of a nation’s critical
infrastructures. Cyber—attacks can be mounted at any time, against anyone and from anywhere. In
a realm, where technology and change are speeding, responding effectively to cyber threats
require a consistent and extensive effort. To address the cyber security issues in Mauritius, a
National Cyber Security Strategy is required which will define the main goals, guidelines and
action plans to respond effectively to cyber threats. The strategy also recognizes the fundamental
challenge of balancing the measures intended to protect security.

By following the strategic guidelines and measures, Mauritius will be able to manage deliberate
and unintentional disturbances in the cyber space as well as respond to and recover from them.
The aspiration is that the action plans outlined in this strategy will position Mauritius where
citizens know what to do to protect them; law enforcement is tackling cyber criminals; effective
cyber security is seen as positive for business in Mauritius; online public services are secure and
the threats to our national infrastructure and national security have been confronted.

The strategy provides an overview of what it takes to effectively protect information systems and
networks and also gives an insight into the Government’s approach and strategy for protection of
cyberspace in the country. The cybersecurity strategic programmes which were set out in both
NICTSP 2007-2011 and NICTSP 2011-2014 have been taken into account to build the
cybersecurity strategic plan. The inputs have also been taken from the survey conducted on the
State of Information Security in Businesses in Mauritius completed in October 2013. The
purpose 0fthe survey was to assess the security posture of businesses in Mauritius.

The cyber security policy is an evolving task and it caters to the whole spectrum of ICT users
including home users and small, medium and large enterprises and Government & non-
Government entities. It serves as an umbrella framework for deﬁning and guiding the actions
related to the security of cyberspace. It also enables individual sectors and organisations in
designing appropriate cyber security policies to suit their needs.

5|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

2. VISION, MISSION AND GOALS FOR CYBER SECURITY

Vision

Mission

 

Goals

To achieve this vision, we want:

Goal 1:

To secure our Cyberspace and establish a front line of defense against
Cybercrime.

      
      
     
 

Goal 2:
To enhance our resilience to Cyber Attacks and be able to defend
against the full spectrum of Threats.

Goal 3:

To develop an efﬁcient collaborative model between the authorities
,. and the business community for the purpose of advancing National
Cyber Security and Cyber Defense.

    
  

 

 

  
    
 

  
 
 
  

Goal 4:

To improve the Cyber Expertise and the comprehensive Cyber
Security Awareness of the society at all levels.

  
      

6|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

PART 2

C yber Security [Vlanagement And The [Mauritian Approach

 

7|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

3. CYBER SECURITY MANAGEMENT AND THE MAURITIAN APPROACH

Preparing for cyber threats and cyber defense involve immediate, transparent and better
coordinated action from all parties in society, both individually and collectively. It is important
to provide political guidance and strategic guidelines for cyber security and take necessary
decisions regarding the allocation of resources and prerequisites.

Cyber Security management requires that the different stakeholders have a reliable, real—time
cyber security situation depiction of the condition of society’s key functions and the disturbances
which can affect their functions. The natures of threats highlight the importance of cooperation
as well as efficient and ﬂexible coordination.

National cyber resilience will be tailored to ensure the preparedness and predictive capabilities
required by the goals and to facilitate its operating capability during cyber conﬂicts and post-
conﬂict recovery.

3.1 Principles

 

The Mauritian approach for managing cyber security is built 011 the followingprinciples:

1.

3‘

Cyber security is a significant part of the comprehensive security of society. The
approach for the implementation of the national cyber strategic plan is based on the set of
goals for cyber security.

Cyber Security relies on the information security preparedness 0f the whole nation. The
implementation of a CIIP framework will help in protecting the national critical
information infrastructures. This will also include developing and offering expeltise and
advice, support and implement responses to threats or incidents and strengthen crisis
management.

The methodology for the implementation of national cyber strategic action plan is
established on efﬁcient and comprehensive collection of information, an analysis and
gathering system along with common and shared situation awareness, national and
international cooperation in preparedness. This requires the establishment of an Anti-
Cyber Threat Monitoring System which will aid to better respond, monitor and
coordinate cyber threats at national level by operating on a 24/7 basis.

Cyber security is being constructed to meet its functional and technical requirements. A
comprehensive framework will be set up to monitor Internet traffic which might be
harmful to the nation and society.

BIPage
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

5. In order to ensure cyber security development, Mauritius will see to it that appropriate

legislations and incentives exist to support the business activities and their development

in this field.

3.2 Proposed Governance Structure

 

Project Owner
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE

Reports to

     
    

Decision Making Body

   
 

Law
Enforcement Academla
Agencies

    
 

Stakeholders

 

 

 

To enable a collaborative working of all key players in public and private sector to safeguard the
country’s information infrastructure, a partnership of government, corporate and private
stakeholders is important and will lead to the success of the implementation of the strategy. An
effective public—private partnership for cyber security would provide the abilities to identify
threats, anomalous behaviours, respond to them and will create a more secure network
environment through better standardized security programs. This partnership will also set a stage
to carry out research and development and ﬁnd ways to mitigate security threats. Finally, this
will also help to empower stakeholders to properly address cyber threats.

9|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

Stakeholders and their Roles

The different stakeholders and their roles towards this collaborative framework are described
below:

Stakeholders Roles
Ministry of [CT I Acts as the Project owner and is responsible for setting—
up of the necessary legal framework for strategy
implementation.

 

Nationaleber SecurityCommittee The National Cyber Security Committee acts as the
decision making body and will include representatives
from the MICT, National CERT (CERT—MU), Law
Enforcement and Regulatory Bodies, Critical Sectors,
PMO, Data Protection Office, Vendors & Private sectors
and Academia to oversee and monitor the implementation
of the strategy.

The role of the National Cyber Security Committee will be
to:

0 Lead activities associated with developing and
managing national CIIP efforts, including coordinating
policy development, outreach and awareness, risk
assessment and management efforts, funding and
suppon for the CUP program efforts.

0 Serve as an important escalation functions for resolving
important issues and emergencies.

 

NationalCERT The National CERT (CERT-MU), a division of the
National Computer Board is the advisory body for
information security issues in the country.

The responsibilities of the National CERT will be:

I To implement the outputs generated from the
cybersecurity committee.

I To handle and coordinate cyber security incidents.

I To monitor and analyse the information security
situation at national level.

I To prevent occurrence and recurrence of cyber
incidents by developing incentives for cyber security
compliance and proactive actions

I To promote the adoption of best practices in
information security and compliance.

 

 

 

10|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

 

0 To interact with government agencies, industry, the
research community, and others to analyse cyber
threats and vulnerabilities, disseminate reasoned and
actionable cyber security information such as
mitigations to the public.

 

Law Enforcement Law Enforcement will be represented by members of the
Police. Their roles will be to:

0 Enable effective prevention, investigation, and
prosecution of various aspects of cybercrime
that intend to steal information or compromise
the integrity of critical operations.

 

Regulatory Bodies The Regulatory bodies shall include the ICTA, IBA and
the Bank of Mauritius (the ﬁnancial sector regulator). The
roles of the regulatory bodies will be to:

0 Establish, control, inspect and enforce
regulations with regard to cyber security

0 Encourage organisations to adopt security best
practices and guidelines

 

Critical Sectors The critical sectors will include members from different
the financial services (FSC, MRA), Tourism (MTPA),
CEB, CWA, ICT & Broadcasting, Health (MIH),
Government Services (GOC, CISD), Manufacturing
(MEXA), Transport & Logistics (AML, MPA), Sugar
(MSA) and Customs (MRA).

The role of the critical sectors will be to facilitate
identiﬁcation, prioritization, assessment and protection of
critical information infrastructure through information
sharing and reporting.

 

Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce (PMO) The Representatives of the PMO would be the PMO
Security Division and Counter Terrorism Unit. Their roles
will be to advise and support the implementation of the
strategy geared towards protecting Mauritius from cyber
threats and attacks.

 

IT Security Unit The IT Security Unit will establish IT Security best
practices and promote implementation of information
security standards within the Civil Service.

 

Data Protection Office The Data Protection Ofﬁce will act as the advisory body on
data protection and privacy issues.

 

 

 

11|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

 

Academia Academia will consist of members from the Tertiary
Education Commission, the Universities and Tertiary
Education Institutions. The roles of the academia will be
to:

0 Encourage Research & Development to develop
trustwonhy and cost effective security solutions

- Collaborate with industry in frontline technologies
and solution oriented research

- Develop educational and training programs for the
formation of information security professionals and
students

 

Vendors and Private Sectors Vendors & Private Sectors will be represented through
respective Associations. Their responsibilities will be to:

0 To advise on secure products and services which are
critical to the information infrastructure operators and
the general participants in the national economy

- To provide strategic insights on security architecture,
operations and risk management approaches to users

I To provide patches and mitigation strategies in the face
of attacks

 

 

 

12|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

PART 3

Strategic Guidelines For Cyber Security

Importance Of The National C yber Security Strategy And Action Plan

 

13|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

4. STRATEGIC GUIDELINES FOR CYBER SECURITY

A national cyber security strategy is established in line with the strategic guidelines. This will
create the conditions for the realization of the national cyber security vision. A separately
prepared action plan will outline the measures to achieve the national cyber security goals. The
implementation of the strategic guidelines will reinforce national and international cooperation.
Such collaboration can best serve the whole society and suppon the stakeholders who play a
significant role in the cyber security community. Cyber security is constructed on capabilities
development over the long term, their convenience and ﬂexible use and the resilience of
society’s key functions against the disturbances in cyber security.

Strategic Guidelines

Guidelines

To secure our Cyberspace and establish a front line of defense against Cybercrime

This initiative is aimed at building an approach to Cyber defense strategy that prevents
interference and attack in cyberspace by improving capabilities, articulating roles and
developing appropriate responses for public and private sector. By creating or enhancing shared
situational awareness of network vulnerabilities, threats and events and the ability to act quickly
to reduce our current vulnerabilities and prevent intrusions can help in securing our cyberspace.
Additionally, this strategic guideline also emphasizes on enhancing the capacity of law
enforcement agencies to investigate and prosecute cybercrime. Cyber defense against
cybercrime will be exercised and developed together through international cooperation and the
exchange of information.

To enhance our resilience to Cyber Attacks and be able to defend against the full spectrum
of threats
The strategic guidelines of the National Cyber Security Strategy are advanced by intensifying

efforts to protect the critical infrastructure and networks in order to provide reasonable assurance
of resilience and security to support national missions and economic stability. The well-being of
the national economy, secu1ity and quality of life is becoming increasingly dependent on the
safety and the robustness of critical infrastructures whose disruptions can affect a nation’s ability
to function effectively in crisis. Key importance is being given to government information
infrastructure & systems which will be protected against cyber threats through security audits
and implementation of national and international Information Security standards. The goal is to
detect and identify any disturbances to the vital functions and to respond to them in a manner
which minimizes their detrimental effects.

14|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

To develop an efﬁcient collaborative model between the authorities and the business
community for the purpose of advancing National Cyber Security and Cyber Defense

The strategic guidelines of the Cyber Security Strategy are reinforced by strengthening active
collaboration between actors whose aim is to achieve a shared situation awareness and effective
defense against the cyber threats. A common set of criteria will be created to facilitate
identiﬁcation of critical IT infrastructures and systems, A method will be devised for risk and
vulnerability assessments. Cyber defense will be advanced by promoting the exchange of
information and regulations as well as through cooperation between the authorities and the
business community.

To improve the Cyber Expertise and the comprehensive Cyber Security Awareness of all
societal actors

Encouraging a cadre of cyber security professionals and building capacity to deter and
defend against high-end threats

In a secure infonnation society, everyone must be aware of the information security risks of their
actions and their responsibility in preventing those risks. This strategy is intended to raise the
level of competence by investing in the expertise of information security professionals and in the
general awareness of information security of all actors. T0 continuously improve the competence
and awareness of the actors, inputs will be made to promote the development of a cadre of
skilled cyber security professionals and capacity building so that Mauritius can retain an edge in
this area and development to keep producing innovative solutions operations in cyberspace.

By promoting awareness of the need for cyber security, the Strategy will encourage individuals,
Industry and all levels of government to adapt behaviour and adopt the technology required to
confront evolving cyber threats.

The cooperation between industry and academia on knowledge sharing in information security
areas will also be promoted by holding regular annual conferences on information security
targeting major players and participants in the region.

5. IMPORTANCE OF THE NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY
AND ACTION PLAN

The ICT sector is inﬂuencing the lives of people through direct or indirect contribution to the
various sociO-economic parameters such as employment and standard of living. It is playing a
significant role in transforming Mauritius into a cyber-hub in the African region. The
Government has also been a key driver for increased adoption and promotion of IT based

15|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

products and IT enabled services in the public services (e—Govemment services to citizens),
education (e—learning, virtual classrooms) and ﬁnancial services (mobile banking, Intemet
banking). Such initiatives have enabled increased IT adoption in the country.

In the light of the growth of the ICT sector in Mauritius, providing the right focus for creating a
secure computing environment has become one of the compelling priorities for the country.
Cyber space is vulnerable to a wide variety of incidents which could hamper economic, public
health, safety and national security activities. Reputation, trust and brand value can all be
seriously affected by information loss and theft.

However, with rapid identification, information exchange, investigation and coordinated
response and remediation, the damaged caused by malicious activities can be mitigated. The
protection of information infrastructure and preservation of the confidentiality, integTity and
availability of information is the essence of a secure cyberspace.

Due to the dynamic nature of the cyberspace, there is a need to address the security challenges
and issues. These actions are unified under a National Cyber Security Strategy which sets out
guidelines, measures and action plans that will provide reasonable assurance of resilience and
security to support national missions and economic stability. A secure society makes it easier for
both individuals and businesses to plan their activities, which in turn boosts economic activity as
well as improve the country’s appeal for international investors. The implementation of the
strategy is planned over a period of 5 years from 2014 to 2019.

16|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

PART 4

National Cyber Security Strategic Actinn Plan

 

17|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

6. NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGIC ACTION PLAN 2014 - 2019

  

GOAL 1: T0 SECURE OUR CYBERSPACE AND ESTABLISH A FRONT LINE OF DEFENSE AGAINST CYBER CRIME

 
 
 
   

         

 

Appruach Project Project Name Description] Lead Stakclmldcrlsl Priority Start End Date
Code

     

 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tackling cyber Setting up of 3 Cyber To better respond, monitor and MICT
security Threat Monitoring System coordinate cyber threats at ICTA
Reducing online national level It will also ITSU
vulnerability include a cyber-forensics lab for CERT-MU DPO
Limiting criminal carrying out forensic activities. POLICE
activity online PMO
Stimulating more ISPs
effective CSIPZ Setting up of a content For controlling and blocking MICT High 2015 2016
partnerships ﬁltering system to block access to age-sensitive content CERT-MU
illicit materials on ICT on mobile devices. ICTA
. MICT
Making it safer to do dev1ces ISPs
business in DPO
cyberspace POLICE
- increasing ITSU
awareness and CSlP3 Establish a mechanism for This mechanism will help to MICT High 2015 2016
visibility ofﬂn‘eats the removal of illegal remove online , illegal child CERT-MU ICTA
Improvmg contents content after 1t has been POLICE
Incident Response identiﬁed MOGECFW
Protecting NGOlS
Information and CSlP4 Conducting Cyber Security To conduct regular cyber High 2015 2017
Services Drills security drills and exercises at
‘ national and or anizalional level MICT
Fostenng a culture a1 th g _ CERT-MU ICT A
that manages the to dev Illatel e sgcunty posture ITSU POLICE
risks an eve . o §n1ergency CRITI C AL
Promoting preparedness 1n resmmg and SECTORS
conﬁdence in dealmg thh cyber secunty
cyberspace 1nc1dents.
C51P5 Enhance Law Enforcement I To develop new training, MICT High 2015 2019
capability on cybersecurity giving more capability to POLICE SLO
understand and investigate CERT-MU
cybersecurity. ICTA

 

l CSlPl — Cyber Security Strategic Goal 1 Project 1

18|Page
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

 

19|Page

 

 

 

 

 

c To incorporate eleclrunic DPO
evidence and introductory
cybercrime training within
the curriculum for law
enforcement agencies.
I To include training on
cybercrime and electronic
evidence for all new police
recruits
CSIPG International and Regional To promote greater levels of MICT High Ongoing
Cooperation on cybercrime cooperation regionme and ICTA
internationally and shared ITSU
understanding on cyber-crime. CERT-MU DPO
POLICE
MOFARIIT
CSlP7 Enhance the security of To develop effective public MICT High 2014 2019
cyberspace private partnership and ICTA
collaborative engagement ITSU
through technical and DPO
operational cooperation between CERT'MU POLICE
authorities and business PMO
community. ISPs
CRITICAL
SECTORS
CSIPS Legal Framework 0 To develop a dynamic legal High 2014 2016
Assessment ﬁ'amework and its periodic
rev1e\-av to address c-yper CERT-MU
secunty challenges ansmg SLO
out of technological ICT A
developmefxts m Icy1)er MICT ITSU
spflce and IIS harnnongnon DPO
w1th mtematxonal POLICE
frameworks.
ISPs

 

 

I To introduce in the law the
possibility to intercept
communications on real—
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

    
    

 

time and to retain trafﬁc
data for a speciﬁc period of
time.

GOAL 2: TO ENHANCE OUR RESILIENCE T0 CYBER ATTACKS AND BE ABLE TO DEFEND AGAINST THE FULL SPECTRUM OF THREATS

  
    
 
  
   

          
 

 
 

Approach Project Name Description] Lead Slakclmldurtsh Priority Start End

   

   

      

 

 

 

Date Date
Defending our Develop and Implement a To protect the national critical MICT 2014 2015
national CIIP Framewurk information infrastructures and ICTA
infrastructure from 5511ng up of sectoral CERTs Io ISPs
cyber attacks coordinate and communicate CRITICAL
- Reinforcing actions within respective sectors SECTORS
defenses in cyber for effective incident response CERT'MU DPO
space and resolution and cyber crisis MITIA
Improving management. POLICE
resilience and ITSU
reducing the PRIVATE
impact of cyber SECTORS
attacks CS2P2 Development and To enable organisations to ITSU High 2015 2018
Implementation of a Cyber respond to cyber incidents and ICTA
Ensuring that Crisis Management Plan assess the preparedness of DPO
Mauritius has the organisations to withstand cyber- CERT-MU PMO
capability to protect attacks. ISPs
our interests in cyber CRITICAL
space SECTOR
POLICE
. Improving our CS2P3 Provision for Fiscal To encourage organisations to MICT Medium 2016 2017
ability to detect Schemes and Incentives install, reinforce and upgrade CERT-MU MOFED
threats in cyber information infrastructure with SMEDA
space regard to cyber security‘ MOBEC
Increasing uur CS2P4 Creation of a naﬁonal test- To provide a secure and resilient MICT CERT—MU Medium 2016 2019
capability to bed for network security infrastructure by encouraging 3.11 MOFED ITSU
prevent and organizations to periodically test ISPs
disrupt attacks on and evaluate the adequacy and VENDORS
Mauritius effectiveness of technical and ACADEMIA
operaﬁonal security conn'ol CRITICAL
measures implemented in IT SECTORS
systems and networks. CISD

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ZOIPage
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

Adoption of a

threats

Cyber
Security Controls Scheme
for protection against cyber

  
  

To mandate the implementation
and accreditation of a Cyber
Security Controls Scheme within
organisations‘ This will provide
the basic but essential level of
protection within organizations’
IT systems in order to mitigate
the risks emanating from cyber
threats

CERT-MU

    
 
 
    
   
   
   
   
   

GOAL 3: DEVELOP AN EFFICIENT COLLABORATIVE MODEL BETWEEN THE AUTHORITIES AND THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY F OR THE
PURPOSE OF ADVANCING CYBER SECURITY

ADPI‘OdLh

   

 
   

Helping to shape the

development of cyber

space

0 Promoting an open
and interoperable
cyberspace
Protecting our way
of life
Ensuring security
without
compromising our
values

lePage

Project Name

Description

  
      

Stakeholdcrtsb

Priuuly

S -' rt
Dale

End
Date

 

 

 

 

Promote Information Risk To promote Information Risk
Management at National Management using standard ITSU
s CERT-MU RISK MGT
level frameworks such as NIST s FIRMS
Framework for Cybersecurity
within public and private sector.
CS3P2 Promote the universal T0 adopt the implementation of MSB Medium Ongoing
adoption of Information security standards such as ISO CERT-MU ITSU
Security standards at 27001, ISO 27003, ISO 27004, ISO SGS
National level 27005, ISO 27006.
CS3P3 Promote Secure software To encourage secure software CERT-MU MICT High 2015 2018
Development development processes based on ACADEMIA
global best practices. MITIA
CS3P4 Promote the designation of To encourage all organisations, Medium 2017 2019
a Senior Information private and public to designate
Security Personnel (CISO, member of a senior management as CERT-MU APPLICABLE
IS Consultants, Chief Information Security Ofﬁcer, TO ALL
Information Security IS Consultants, Information SECTORS
Experts) within Security Experts responsible for
organisations security efforts and initiatives.
CS3P5 Promote the ISMS to be implemented for High 2014 2019
tmplemehtatlon 0f. Mtntstrtes and 'Depanments wtth ITSU MICT
Information Secunty Cntlcal Informatwn Systems .
Standards in the Civil & Lme CIB
- Ministries CISD
Servtce
ZZIPage

Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

 

 

CS3P6 To promote e-Governmenl T0 mandate the implementation of MICT High 2014 2019
initiatives and ensure global security best practices, . CERT-MU
conformance to security business continuity management .L.me. ITSU
_ _ . . Mlmstnes/
beslplactlces. and cyber crms management plan Department GOC
for all e-Govemment initiatives to CIB
decrease the risk of disruption and CISD
improve the security posture.
C53P7 Adoption of guidelines for To encourage organisations to adopt MICT Medium 2017 2019
procurement of ICT guidelines to procure trustworthy CERT»MU
products ICT products and provide the ITSU
procurement of manufactured ICT CIB
products that have security CISD
implications. PUBLIC
PROCUREMENT
ICTA OFFICE
MRA
Ministry of
Industry,
Commerce &
Consumer
Protection
CS3P8 Conducting mandatory To make security audit mandatory CERT-MU High 2014 2016
Information Security on a periodic basis for assessing the ITSU
Audit organisation’s security postme, SLO
including critical information ICTA
infrastructure. MICT CIB
MOFED
DPO
BANK OF
MAURITIUS
CS3P9 Collaboration with c To collaborate jointly with MICT Medium 2017 2019
industry for research and industry and academia to ITSU
development support the application of AC ADEMI A
research for building innovative CERT-MU MRC
cyber security solutions and I d
enhance our technical A n ustly
ssocxatxons

 

 

capabilities to support our
national security interests and
ACTORS
Approach

Extending knowledge

0 Building a
coherent cross-
sector agenda
Deepening

understanding of
the threats.
vulnerabilities and
risks

Enhancing skills
0 Building a culture
that makes people

Z3|Page

Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

wider economic prosperity.

- T0 enlarge and strengthen the

cyber security research
community by formalis'mg the
coordination and prioritisation
of cyber security research and
development activities.

 

CS3P10

 

To establish
collaborative

a

frame work

with vendors and service
providers to improve the
visibility of the integTity

of ICT products

and

testing and validating the
security of such products

 

I To foster trusted relationships

with product/system vendors
and service providers for
improving end-to-end supply
chain security visibility‘

- To encourage a consortium of

Government and private sector
to enhance the availability of
tested and certiﬁed IT products
based on open standards

 

ICTA

 

MICT
ITSU
CERT-MU
Industry
Associations
MlCCP
PROCUREMENT
OFFICE
MINISTRY OF
INDUSTRY &
COMMERCE

 

Medium

 

2017

 

2019

GOAL 4: TO IMPROVE THE CYBER EXPERTISE AND THE COMPREHENSIVE CYBER SECURITY EDUCATION & AWARENESS OF ALL SOCIETAL

 

Pru' ct Project Name Actions tu Include Lend Stukehuldertst Priority Start End
Code Dale Dute
CS4P1 Promote security To promote security certiﬁcations MICT Medium 2016 2019
certiﬁcations and trainings from organisations such as EC— ITSU
fromrenowned Council, OWASP, ISC2, SANS ICTA
International organisations amongst others can be considered CERT-MU ACADEMIA
for security professionals. INDUSTRY
ASSOCIATIONS
CS4P2 Establish cyber security To establish cyber security training MICT Medium 2016 2019
training programmes for programmes for SMEs. This Will NCB MINISTRY OF
SMEs help to foster a culture of (CERT-MU) BUSINESS
information security within the SMEDA ENTERPRISE
SME sectur‘ INDUSTRY
Republic of Mauritius - National Cyber Security Strategy

 

 

 

understand risks
and enable them to
use cyberspace
securely.

 

Expanding capability
- Building technical

to respond to
incidents

 

 

 

 

Security annual events

 

major players and participants in
the region.

 

 

 

 

 

ASSOCIATION
ICTA
CS4P3 Cyber Security Education To improve educational MICT High 2014 2019
involvement with cyber security at CERT-MU
. TEC
all levels (pnmary, secondary and MOE/HR ICTA
teniaxy) through curriculum ITSU
development and research. POLICE DEPT
CS4P4 Cyber Security AwaIeness To improve Cyber Security High 2014 2019
in Civil Service Awareness and Education in Civil ITSU MICT
Service MCSAR
CS4P5 Organisation of To hold regular annual conferences Medium 2015 2019
. . . . . CERT—MU
Internatxonal Cyber on mformatlon secunty targetmg MICT ICT A

 

Z4|Page

